=== Overview
Freeciv is a turn-based strategy game, in which each player becomes the leader of a civilization. You compete against several opponents to found cities, use them to support a military and economy, and finally to complete an empire that survives all encounters with its neighbors to emerge victorious. Each opponent may be either another human or be controlled by the computer. All players begin at the dawn of history with a handful of units -- typically with an explorer and a couple of settlers in 4000 BC -- and race to expand outward from those humble beginnings.

Achieving success requires a balance between economic expansion, military strength, and technological development. Not only must you develop all three in concert to both expand and successfully defend your empire, but any of the three may provide victory over your opponents:

 - As in other games of conquest and expansion, you are declared the winner by default once the last city and unit of every other civilization is destroyed.

 - Once technological progress has brought you into the space age, you may launch a spacecraft destined for Alpha Centauri; the first civilization whose craft reaches the system wins.

 - In the absence of other means to determine victory, the game will end in the year 2000 AD if no spacecraft have yet been launched. The surviving civilizations are then rated, and the one with the highest score is the winner.

=== Strategy
While every game is different, there's a basic strategy which most players follow, especially at the start of the game.

These steps may vary depending upon the server options, but in general, the steps are: 

 0. Choosing the first city site.
 1. Mapping the countryside.
 2. Defending the cities.
 3. Deciding which units to build first.
 4. Improving the land.
 5. Deciding where to build cities.
 6. Taking care of the cities.
 7. Interacting with other players (diplomacy).
 8. Exploring the world.
 9. Things to keep in mind.
10. Making your own strategy for the game.


 0. Choosing the first city site.

    Start the game by wandering around BRIEFLY to find a good place to build the first city.  Don't feel tempted to investigate any yellow-roofed villages yet - they might contain barbarian tribes.  Build the city close to resources and perhaps close to the sea.  Keep in mind that the city you build first will be your capital!  The idea is to balance the quality of the site you find against getting your first city established as early as possible.

 1. Mapping the countryside.

    After the capital city has been founded, it will start producing a warrior unit.  These units can be used to rove around exploring the countryside.  Remember, it is risky to leave a city undefended, so perhaps keep the first warrior in the city, and use the following one to explore.  If you started the game with an explorer unit, use that to explore, obviously!

 2. Defending the cities.

    At this point, defend your cities by always leaving a warrior unit in them.  As your civilization develops units with a greater defense strength, replace the obsolete units with new ones to ensure your cities have maximum defense.  The units most often used for defense are (in order of strength):  Warrior, Phalanx, Pikemen, Musketeers, and Riflemen.

    Keep in mind that with some types of government, military units inside or outside cities can reduce or create unhappiness. Also remember that when a unit is inside a city, it gets a 50% defensive bonus, as if fortified.  When a new city is built, the city starts to build the best available defensive unit from the above list.

 3. Deciding which units to build first.

    After building one or two Warrior units, start building Settlers.  Settlers are best put to use founding new cities; while they can also build agricultural improvements (see the next section

it is better to use Workers for this when available, as unlike Settlers, Workers do not consume food from their parent city.  Keep in mind that a large population increases both the amount of productivity and your civilization's research rate, not to mention that cities secure land for your empire, so founding new cities should be a high priority initially.

 4. Improving the land.

    Each city has an area of land around it that can be used for growing food, producing goods, and generating trade.  This output can be increased by using Workers (or Settlers) to improve the land close to your cities.  The land can be improved with irrigation (increasing food

roads (allowing units to move faster and increasing trade

and mines (increasing production

among other improvements.

 5. Deciding where to build cities.

    The best location for a city is a matter of taste.  A city which is placed near the sea is easier to spot by opponents, but can also serve as a port for sea-going units.  (They also usually need a coastal defense later on.)  The best strategy is to build a few of both, but keep in mind that your opponents will find it harder to locate your city if you don't build it by the sea.

 6. Taking care of the cities.

    Every city has a band of citizens.  The number of citizens depends on the city's population.  When you click on a city, you can see how the land around the city is being used.  You can assign your citizens to the land, or they can be specialists that contribute to your civilization in other ways.  Especially at the start of the game, care should be taken to ensure that the citizens are employed so that they maximize growth, trade and production.

    If too much food is being generated, a citizen can be taken off the land by clicking on the occupied land tile.  This citizen can then be transferred to the other duties mentioned previously.

    If you move all of your citizens into the city and right-click on the central tile of the land, the citizens will be rearranged to maximize food production.



=== Terrain
Terrain serves three roles: the theater upon which your units battle rival civilizations, the landscape across which your units travel, and the medium which your cities work to produce resources. The different types of terrain each have different strengths and drawbacks; see the sections on each terrain type for details.

Terrain affects combat very simply: when a land unit is attacked, its defense strength is multiplied by the defense factor ("bonus") of the terrain beneath it. See the help section on Combat for further details.

Terrain complicates the movement of land units -- sea and air units always expend one movement point to move one tile, but moving onto rough terrain such as Mountains can cost land units more.

Tiles within range of a city may be worked by that city to produce food, production, and trade points, and the quantity of each produced depends on the terrain. These three products are so important that we specify the output of a tile simply by listing them with slashes in between: for example, "1/2/0" describes a tile that each turn when it is being worked produces one food point, two production points, and no trade points. In addition to the characteristic output of the terrain, some tiles have an additional special resource that boosts one or two of the products. See the Economy section for more information on the use of these products.

The net benefit of a tile for your city depends on your government type as well as city improvements and wonders.

It is possible for your units to change the terrain and hence its effects; see the section on Terrain Alterations for more details. City centers (the tile a city is on) get some of these benefits for free; see the section on Cities for more detail.

===  Alterations
Settlers, Workers, and Engineers have the ability to alter terrain tiles in several ways.

Irrigation systems can be built on suitable types of terrain. Irrigation causes a tile to produce some extra food each turn. Building irrigation requires a nearby source of water: an Ocean, Lake, or River tile, or another tile with an irrigation system, must share an edge (not just a corner) with the target tile. Once irrigated, land remains so even if the water source is removed. Given sufficient technology, you may upgrade the irrigation system on a tile into even more productive Farmland by irrigating it a second time.

Mines can be built on some types of terrain, which increases the number of production points (shields) produced by that tile. However, it is not possible to have irrigation and a mine on the same tile.

Terrain not suitable for irrigation systems or mines can often be permanently converted into a type more suitable to the player's needs, although this usually takes longer. Converting terrain from one type to another in this way may destroy an existing mine or irrigation system, if the resulting terrain is unsuitable for the improvement, and may also remove special resources if they were specific to the original terrain type.

 - Settlers and Workers have a limited range of terrain conversions available to them, initiated by issuing the "irrigate" or "mine" orders when on terrain which cannot support the requested improvement; see the table below. (Converting one kind of terrain into another with the "irrigate" order does not require a water source.)

 - Engineers can perform a much wider range of transformations on almost any type of terrain by issuing the "transform" order. In some rulesets, Engineers on board sea-going vessels can even reclaim land from water tiles, and similarly land can be transformed to ocean, although such radical transformations may require a certain number of surrounding tiles to already be land or water respectively. (Units will move to safe neighboring tiles when the transformation takes place, if possible.)

Roads can be built on any land tile, even if there are other improvements on that tile. (To build a road on a River tile, though, you must know Bridge Building.) With the appropriate advance, roads may later be upgraded to railroads. Roads and railroads allow your units to move more quickly, and they increase the resources produced in cities.

 - Units use only one third of a movement point when going from one tile to an adjacent tile, if both tiles have a road.

 - Units expend no movement points when moving along a railroad. You may ride a railroad indefinitely. (As may your enemies!)

 - A road may increase the trade resources produced by some types of terrain. This effect is retained when a road is upgraded to a railroad.

 - A railroad additionally increases the shield resources produced by a tile by 50%. (Depending on server options, railroads may also increase food and trade resources, or may increase shield resources by an amount other than 50%.)

Technology advances allow other kinds of structures to be built, sometimes known as "bases"; see the following sections for details.

The following table shows the number of turns required for one unit of Settlers or Workers to complete an activity. These numbers are reduced to half (rounded up) for Engineers. The time taken can be reduced further by several units working together as a team; if two or more units are working on the same task on the same tile, their efforts will be added together each turn until the task is finished. Be careful not to dedicate too many units to one task, though; excess effort can be wasted, and a group of Settlers, Workers, and/or Engineers is highly vulnerable to enemy attacks.



===   Pillaging
Many units -- in the default rules, all land units -- have the ability to destroy terrain alterations, by pillaging. Pillaging removes one terrain alteration per turn per unit. Depending upon the ruleset, you may be given a choice of which terrain alteration to pillage, or they will be pillaged in the following order:

 - farmland
 - irrigation
 - mining
 - a base (fortress, airbase, ...)
 - a railroad
 - a road

Tiles that do not have such terrain alterations cannot be pillaged. In addition, terrain conversions and transformations cannot be undone by pillaging. For example, if you have irrigated a Forest tile to convert it into a Plain, pillaging will not convert it back into a Forest -- to do so, you would have to convert the tile again with a Settler, Worker, or Engineer.

===  Villages
Villages (also called "huts") are primitive communities spread across the world at the beginning of the game. Any land unit can enter a village, making the village disappear and deliver a random response. If the village proves hostile, it could produce barbarians or the unit entering may simply be destroyed. If they are friendly, the player could receive gold, a new technology, a military unit (occasionally a settler; and sometimes a unit that the player cannot yet create or even a new city.

Later in the game, helicopters may also enter villages, but overflight by other aircraft will cause the villagers to take fright and disband.

===  Borders
If enabled on the server, each nation has borders, which can be seen as dotted lines on the map. Borders determine what land your citizens can work and where you can found new cities, and whether your units are considered to be aggressively deployed by your citizens (see the section on Happiness). Borders also come into play when there is a diplomatic pact between nations (see the section on Diplomacy).

Founding a city establishes a claim on an area of land around the city. Once claimed, a tile that can be directly worked by a city can not change ownership unless the city does (or is destroyed). However, the ownership of land that is out of range of any city can change depending on factors such as the relative size of nearby nations' cities.

Borders can only extend into water for tiles adjacent to a city; other water tiles remain unclaimed territory.

Bases can also extend national borders. See the help on Terrain Alterations for more details.

=== Economy
The products which your cities extract from the surrounding terrain are the fountain from which your civilization is watered. There are three types of products: food points, production points, and trade points. The following sections describe each of these resources along with its properties, uses, and limitations.

===  Food
Your population needs food to survive. Each citizen requires two food points per turn; in addition, some units (such as Settlers in the default ruleset) may require food points from the city supporting them.

Every city has a granary for storing food points (the building called a Granary in the default ruleset only enhances this capability). Cities producing more food than they require accumulate the surplus in their granary, while those producing less than they require deplete their granary. When food is needed but none remains, the city population starves, killing food-consuming units first, followed by citizens, until the food deficit ends.

Excess food can increase the population: the city granary has a limited capacity, and once full the city grows by one citizen and the granary starts again at empty. But since granary capacity increases with population, each citizen is more costly than the last, making this mode of growth important only for small cities. (An alternative way for cities to grow is "rapture", described in the section on Happiness.)

===  Production
Production points (also known as "shields") represent manufacturing output. Most units require production points as upkeep, and demand them from their home city, although under autocratic regimes each city supports a few units for free. If city production drops too low, the units that cannot be supported are automatically disbanded. Most types of unit can also be disbanded at any time. If a unit is disbanded while in a city, half of its production cost will usually be put towards that city's surplus.

Production points in excess of any required by the city's units are put towards whichever unit, building, or wonder has been selected as the city's current product. Just as food points accumulate in the city granary and yield a citizen when it reaches full, so production points accumulate until the cost of the product has been achieved. Products appear in their city when complete -- units appear on the map while improvements and wonders are added to their city's list of structures. Any leftover production points remain available to be applied towards the next project.

In the default ruleset, a city can build at most one product per turn, regardless of its production surplus. However, in some rulesets, factors such as city size and technology may enable a single city to produce more than one unit in a single turn under certain conditions. A city with multiple "build slots", ordered to build a unit, can build as many of that single kind of unit per turn as its production surplus allows, up to the number of slots. Units which cost city population to build are an exception to this rule; they can only be built singly, as can buildings.

A city can be given a list of several products to build in its "worklist", avoiding the need to pay attention to it every few turns. Each item on the worklist represents a single product (such as a unit); the city will work through them in order. When a city has finished all the work you have given it to do, it will try to build the last item again if possible, otherwise it will choose a new target itself. If a city is currently producing gold (building Coinage in the default rules

an activity which never completes, putting an item on its worklist will cause it to stop producing gold and start working on the new item next turn. In rulesets which permit it, a city may take several units of the same type off its worklist in a single turn, but if a different kind of item is reached, production pauses until the following turn. This can be used to limit the number of units produced by highly productive cities.

Each player is free to build any products that his technology has made available, with a few restrictions; see the sections on Units, City Improvements, and Wonders of the World for more information. Be careful -- the game even gives you the freedom to produce units you cannot support and buildings whose upkeep you cannot afford, both of which will be disbanded immediately after completion.

You can always change the product on which a city is working, though you lose half of the accumulated production points when switching from a building, unit, or wonder to a product from one of the other two categories. You can spend gold to complete a project in one turn by hitting the Buy button on the city dialog.

Some production points may be lost to waste, although there is no waste in the default rules. Waste can result in your cities not building anything.

Cities with a large production output generate pollution; see the section on Cities for more information.

===  Trade
Trade points reflect wealth generated in each city by external commerce. Some trade points may be lost to corruption, which varies among forms of government, and tends to increase with distance from your capital city. Each city distributes its remaining trade points among three uses: gold, in the form of taxes, goes into your national treasury; luxury points influence citizen morale; and science points ("bulbs") contribute towards the discovery of new technology.

You must choose a single ratio for your civilization by which trade points are distributed among these three uses. Though you may alter the tax rates on any turn, you are constrained to multiples of ten percent, and most forms of government limit their maximum value.

Having this single ratio does not impact gold and science, because gold and technological progress are both empire-wide tallies. Luxury is more problematic, however, because its effect is local -- it affects only the city producing it. Thus, while it would be convenient for unhappy cities to invest all their trade in luxury while others invested in science or taxes instead, you will instead have to compromise among the needs of all your cities (although there may be ways to make local adjustments, such as assigning citizens as entertainers in the default ruleset). See the section on Happiness for more details on the effect of luxuries.

Besides working terrain gifted with rare commodities, or with access to waterways and roads, you can increase trade by establishing trade routes between cities. In the default ruleset, you accomplish this by producing a Caravan or Freight unit, sending them to another city at least nine tiles away or belonging to a different civilization, and issuing the "make trade route" command. (The minimum distance can be changed with the 'trademindist' server option.)

The origin civilization of the unit gains immediate revenue in gold and science from selling its trade goods at the destination city. The initial revenue depends on the trade already produced by the two cities involved and their distance apart. Some advances make transportation easier and reduce this one-time revenue.

Also, an ongoing trade route is established that benefits both its origin and destination equally by generating trade points for each city every turn. The amount of ongoing trade increases with the size of each city and the distance between them; it is doubled if the cities are on different continents, and doubled again if the cities are from different civilizations. This last condition means the net benefit to your civilization of a trade route is the same regardless of whether you own both cities or only one of them; if you only own one city, trade in each city is doubled, but you only get the benefit from one end of the route.

(If a trade route already exists between two cities, the origin civilization can still gain initial revenue by entering the marketplace and selling trade goods, but it is reduced to a third.)

The number of trade routes per city is limited to four. If you attempt to establish more routes, the trade route with the smallest ongoing revenue is canceled if it would be less than the new route.

Beware: in rulesets where plague is enabled, it can travel along trade routes. See the section on Plague for more details.

To view the current trade routes of a city, click and hold over the Trade: line in the Overview tab in the city view.

=== Cities
Cities are your sole instrument for developing natural resources and channeling them toward expansion, technological progress, and warfare.

A city is created when Settlers are given the "build city" command on suitable terrain, removing the unit from play to provide the city with its first citizen. A city may grow to include dozens of citizens, some working within the city while others are dispatched as new settlers. Famine, war, and plague kill citizens and reduce population; with the loss of its last citizen a city disappears (in the default ruleset, this can leave ruins, although these have no effect on gameplay).

Each city may work the terrain within its reach. In the default ruleset, this is a fixed radius of approximately three tiles, giving access to 20 tiles on rectangular maps, or 18 tiles on hexagonal ones, in addition to the city center tile. In other rulesets it may be different, and may vary depending on factors such as the size of the city and known technologies.

To extract resources from a tile, you must have a citizen working there. You cannot begin working a tile which a neighboring city is already working, nor can you work terrain upon which an enemy unit is standing, or terrain inside another player's borders. Thus you can simulate conditions of siege by stationing your units atop valuable resources around an enemy city. Units can also be ordered to pillage, which damages improvements. Workers, Settlers, and Engineers could even transform the terrain to make the tile less productive.

The section on Terrain describes how the output of each tile is affected by the terrain, the presence of special resources such as game or minerals, and improvements like roads, irrigation, and mines. Note that the tile on which the city itself rests -- the city center -- gets worked for free, without being assigned a citizen. In the default ruleset, the city's tile always produces at least one food point and at least one production point regardless of terrain. It also gains whatever advantages the terrain offers with an irrigation system (because cities come with water systems built-in

but this may not be used as a basis for irrigating other tiles; for that, an irrigation system must be explicitly built on the tile (which will be of no further benefit to the city itself). Similarly, with sufficient technology and improvements, the city center automatically gets any bonus associated with Farmland. City centers are also automatically developed with roads and, when technology has made them available, railroads (because cities come with transportation built-in).

The roles of citizens are controlled from the City dialog. Citizens working the land are represented by three numbers showing their output on the tile they are working. Clicking on these numbers will remove the citizen from the tile, turning them into a specialist (see the section on Specialists for more details); this can be seen in the row of citizen icons. You can click another tile to assign the citizen to work it, or click on the specialist icon to change their specialist role.

Clicking on the city center tile in the city map will automatically choose citizen roles and tiles to work, with an emphasis on food production and hence growth. Citizen roles are also automatically assigned when a city grows; you may want to inspect cities that have just grown and adjust the role in which the new citizen has been placed. You can set different priorities for a city with the Citizen Governor; see its help section.

Cities may be enhanced with a wide variety of buildings, which can improve their productivity, their military strength, or give them new abilities. See the sections on City Improvements and Wonders of the World for more information.

===  Specialists
The first citizens of each city usually work the land, each toiling to yield up the resources of one terrain tile. However, there may be other specialist roles citizens can assume; in fact, taking another role is the only way they can stop working. A city may outgrow the land available for it to work, in which case some citizens must become specialists.

All specialists enjoy enough privilege to remain perpetually content -- they do not contribute to unhappiness or to celebration. See the section on Happiness for more details.

This section describes the available specialist roles, their effects, and their requirements, if any.

===  Happiness
Keeping your citizens happy (or at least content) is one of the most important objectives in Freeciv. When your citizens become unhappy, your cities will fall into disorder, which disrupts production; but when your citizens are happy, your cities will celebrate, and your production will increase greatly. (If migration is enabled, happiness also affects the relative desirability of cities; see the section on Migration for details.)

Each citizen working the land is either happy, content, unhappy, or angry. The normal state of a working citizen is contentment. However, as your cities grow larger, crowding causes citizens to become unhappy. In the default rules, each citizen in a city after the fourth will be generated unhappy, instead of content.

If the number of unhappy citizens in a city exceeds the number of happy citizens, the city falls into disorder. A city in disorder produces no food or production surplus, science, or taxes; only luxury production remains. Cities which are in disorder are also easier for enemy Diplomats and Spies to incite to revolt. Prolonged disorder under Democracy can lead to a spontaneous national revolution, overthrowing your government.

It should be stressed that only citizens working the land vary in morale -- specialists enjoy enough privilege to remain perpetually content (see the section on Specialists). Thus one solution to the problem of an unhappy citizen is simply to assign that citizen to the role of a specialist. But if cities are ever to work more than four terrain tiles at once, the problem of morale must be confronted more directly.

There are many ways of making unhappy citizens content, which does prevent disorder but is without further benefit. Producing happy citizens can balance the effect of unhappy citizens and also bring other benefits.

Cities that are sufficiently large celebrate when at least half their citizens are happy and none remain unhappy. The effects of celebration vary; in the default ruleset, they depend on your government type:

 - Under Anarchy or Despotism, you will not suffer the normal production penalty for tiles which produce more than 2 points of any resource (food, production, or trade).

 - Under Monarchy or Communism, your city will gain the trade bonus of Republican/Democratic governments: 1 bonus trade point in any tile which already produces at least 1 trade.

 - Under a Republic or a Democracy, your city will enter "rapture": its population will increase by 1 each turn until there is no excess food or until the number of happy citizens is no longer sufficient for celebration. Without rapture, large cities can grow only by struggling to produce a food surplus -- which can be difficult enough -- and then waiting dozens of turns for their granary to fill.

In small empires, as already stated, the fifth citizen in each city is the first unhappy one. As you gain more cities, this limit actually decreases, to simulate the difficulty of imposing order upon a large empire. The precise thresholds depend on government type; see the section on Government for details.



===  Pollution
Pollution can plague large cities, especially as your civilization becomes more industrialized. The chance of pollution appearing around a city depends on the sum of its population, aggravated by several technology advances, and its production point output. When this sum exceeds 20, the excess is the percent chance of pollution appearing each turn; this percentage is shown in the city dialog. (This chance of pollution also affects the risk of plague, if enabled in the ruleset; see the section on Plague.)

Pollution appears as gunk covering the terrain tiles around the city. A polluted tile generates only half its usual food, production, and trade. The pollution can only be cleared by dispatching Workers, Settlers, or Engineers with the "clean pollution" order.

When an unused tile becomes polluted, there is the temptation to avoid the effort of cleaning it; but the spread of pollution has far more terrible results -- every polluted tile increases the chance of global warming. Each time global warming advances, the entire world loses coastal land for jungles and swamps, and inland tiles are lost to desert. This tends to devastate cities and leads to global impoverishment.

The risk of global warming is cumulative; the longer polluted tiles are left uncleaned, the higher the risk becomes, and the risk can linger for some time even after all pollution has been cleaned. If a long time passes with an elevated risk of warming, its effects will be all the more severe when it does occur.

=== City Improvements
Cities may be improved with a wide variety of buildings, each with a different effect. Each city may have only one of each improvement, and some improvements require others to have been built first.

It costs production points to build improvements, and once completed, many improvements require an upkeep of one or more gold pieces per turn. You may dismantle and sell an improvement, receiving one gold piece for each production point used in its construction, although you may only sell one improvement per city per turn. If a turn comes on which you cannot pay the upkeep on all of your improvements, some of them will be automatically sold; obviously this should be avoided as the improvements chosen might not be ones you would have preferred to sell.

Most improvements become available only when you achieve certain technologies, while further advances can render some improvements obsolete, at which point they are automatically sold.

=== Wonders
Wonders are special buildings which can each be completed by only one player each game, and which often enhance their entire civilization. Unlike ordinary city improvements, which must be built with local production points, certain special units built in one city (Caravans and Freight in the default ruleset) can contribute their full cost in production points towards the construction of a wonder in another city.

Once built, a wonder is placed in the city that constructed it, and cannot be sold or destroyed (unless the entire city is destroyed). However, some wonders are made obsolete by the discovery of a certain advance, and lose their effect. Note the asymmetry: while you must personally achieve the advance required by each wonder to build it, it will be disabled when any player achieves the obsoleting advance.

=== Units
Units both offer mobility to your civilization and supply the violence with which it will survive and expand. The available units may be classified as military units, whose talents are those of defense and aggression, and a few noncombatants which support expansion, diplomacy, and trade.

Units are usually built in cities using production points. Once built, units are owned by the city that built them (although they can later be re-homed while visiting a different city) and demand support from that city; this will be one of your major expenses. Most units require upkeep such as production points from their home city every turn, although some autocratic styles of government can force cities to support several units for free. If the upkeep of a unit outweighs its benefit, you can disband it; see the section on Production. A few units, particularly those that you start the game with, have no home city and thus require no upkeep.

Units begin every turn with one or more movement points. Every action undertaken by a unit consumes movement points.

The most basic action is movement; units can move into any of the tiles surrounding their current location, subject to restrictions imposed by their class, by diplomatic obligations (see the section on Diplomacy

and by enemy units (see the section on Zones of Control). The number of movement points consumed may depend on the type of terrain; see the Terrain help.

A unit cannot move onto a tile occupied by an enemy unit, and when directed to do so will attack instead (if capable of attack

locking the two units in combat until one is destroyed. The outcome depends on the attributes of the units in question (hit points, attack and defense strength, and firepower); the Combat section describes the process in detail, and the following sections list specific units' attributes.

Units' attributes can be further boosted by being veteran. Units may be built as veteran by means of certain city improvements or other influences; once built, units can also become veteran through experience (such as surviving combat

which may provide further levels of bonuses beyond those available from their initial training.

Units which have been damaged in combat will regain hit points each turn in which they are not moved. Normally, a unit which has not moved will regain one hit point per turn. Units which are fortified gain an extra hit point. A unit which spends a turn in a city regains one third of its base hit points, and city improvements appropriate to the unit type can improve this further. In the field, bases on tiles can improve the recovery rate (for instance, fortresses in the default ruleset have this effect); units must stay on the tile for a whole turn to get this recovery bonus. Wonders can also boost recovery (such as the United Nations in the default ruleset). Damaged units in Sentry mode will wake up when they have regained all of their hit points.

As technology advances, new types of units become available which obsolete existing types. When you discover such a new technology, your existing units remain intact, but you can no longer build new units of the obsolete type. While an obsolete unit is in one of your cities, you can choose to upgrade it to the latest equivalent by spending gold, with the cost increasing with the difference in production point cost between the two types. When a unit is upgraded, its hit points and movement points are preserved as a fraction of the total; however, in some rulesets (but not the default) it will lose some or all of its veteran levels.

=== Zones of Control
Zones of Control, abbreviated as ZOC, is a game concept which prevents you moving freely in zones controlled (or partially controlled) by enemy forces.

The general rule is that a land unit which is adjacent to an enemy occupied tile cannot move directly to another tile which is also adjacent to an enemy occupied tile.  Here an enemy occupied tile means a land tile with a foreign unit on it.  Adjacency means any of the eight tiles surrounding a unit for rectangular grids, or six tiles for hexagonal grids.

In the following special cases ZOC does not apply:
- A unit moving directly into or out of a city.
- A unit moving onto a tile occupied by a friendly unit.
- A unit moving from an ocean tile (disembarking from a boat).
- A unit type which explicitly ignores ZOC, eg Diplomats and Spies.
- The foreign unit is from a nation with which you have an Alliance pact.

Notes:

- Only land units are restricted by ZOC.

- Non-land units can impose ZOC (that is, count as enemy occupied tiles

but only if they are on a land tile.  So effectively sea units cannot impose ZOC (unless they are in a city

and air units (including helicopters) do not impose ZOC if they are over ocean tiles.

- ZOC does not restrict unit attacks, only movement.

- An enemy city counts as an enemy occupied tile if there are any units inside the city, but not if the city is empty. (This is the same rule as for any other tile).

- Moving from an ocean tile is a special case; moving _to_ an ocean tile (moving back onto a boat) is also permitted, by the special case of moving onto a friendly unit (the boat).

TIP:  You can infiltrate enemy zones by first moving in a Diplomat (or some other unit which ignores ZOC

and then moving regular units onto the tile now occupied by the Diplomat. By repeating this process (and optionally leaving some units behind to keep tiles occupied

you can make a path through enemy territory.

=== Government
Your government type influences your cities' productivity and commerce, your citizens' happiness, and many other game factors.

Your civilization starts out under a Despotism.  As your technology improves, you can select other forms of government (listed below). In order to change your form of government, you must start a revolution.  This will cause your civilization to undergo a period of Anarchy (lasting 1-5 turns); at the end of this time, you will be able to choose your new government.

TIP 1:  Offensive military campaigns are difficult under Republican and Democratic governments unless you give your citizens lots of luxuries to keep them happy.  When conquering other civilizations, it may be helpful to switch to one of the more militant styles of government.

TIP 2:  Scientific advancement requires high levels of trade, which are much easier to achieve under Republican and Democratic governments.  Consider switching to the Republic as soon as you can; gaining advanced technology early in the game puts you at an advantage.

===  Civil War
Civil war is devastating to any empire, and is triggered by the loss of your capital (palace).  Up to half of your cities will rebel and declare allegiance to a new (AI) leader, who will loot half of your treasury and retain all of your scientific advances.

Players remain in the civil war state for just one turn, after which the empire enters a state of anarchy.

The capture of your capital does not always lead to civil war.  If you have treated your people with kindness, you are more likely to retain their loyalty.  Each city that is celebrating reduces the chance of civil war, while each city in disorder increases the likelihood.

In addition, the form of government directly contributes to the chance of civil war.  Governments with universal franchise are far less likely to revolt than those more despotic in nature.

The number of cities an empire needs before it can erupt into civil war is by default 10.  That is, empires with fewer than 10 cities are immune from civil war.  However, this is a server option, and may vary upwards from a minimum of 6.

=== Diplomacy
There are five diplomatic states between players: War, Cease-fire, Armistice, Peace, and Alliance. The first is the natural state, while the others can be achieved by signing diplomatic treaties.

During War, you can freely move your units inside enemy territory and attack their units and cities at will.

When two players decide to end hostilities between them, they can agree on a Cease-fire treaty. This prevents each player from attacking the other, but you can still move your units inside the other player's borders. After a set number of turns, the Cease-fire will lead back to War. Upon first contact with an AI player, it will automatically offer you a Cease-fire treaty.

If you wish for a more permanent peaceful coexistence with another player, you may sign a peace pact. This will enter a transitional Armistice state, which after another set number of turns will turn into a permanent Peace. Breaking an Armistice will drop you directly back to War.

At the moment two players enter into the diplomatic state of Peace, all military units belonging to either player that happen to be within the other's borders will be automatically disbanded according to the treaty. After this, you may not move military units into the other's territory until you either declare War, or forge an Alliance. Breaking a Peace treaty will drop you directly back to War.

An Alliance is the ultimate diplomatic relationship between two players. In this state, you may move units into each other's cities and your units may share the same tile; units no longer impose zones of control. However, alliance treaties come with obligations; you won't be able to ally with a player that is at war with a current ally unless you break the first treaty. If one of your allies declares war on another, the alliance with the aggressor is automatically broken. Breaking an Alliance will drop you to an Armistice treaty. An allied AI player will freely give you its world maps and shared vision, and will seriously consider trading technologies and cities, but in return will expect you to join its wars against other players.

=== Technology
Research into technology is a necessity for improving the ability of your civilization to develop new military units and city improvements.

There are a few ways to gain advances from other civilizations: you will sometimes discover enemy technology when you capture a city; you can steal advances with Diplomats and Spies; wonders can provide you with technology; and another player might grant technology in the terms of a pact. But otherwise advances must be discovered through the efforts of your own people.

Most technology progress comes from trade (see the Trade section) and, in the default ruleset, from scientist specialists (see the Specialists section). While it is possible to change which advance you are currently researching, by default all progress is lost by doing so.

While the majority of the resulting research output ("bulbs") usually goes toward advancing technology, in some rulesets (but not the default

some of it may be diverted to maintain expertise in existing technologies; the quantity required for technology upkeep increases with the total research cost of all advances known to you. The state of advancement at which you start paying this upkeep may depend on factors such as your government type. If research output drops below that required for upkeep, your civilization will forget a random advance, requiring it to be researched again.

Technological advances can render units, city improvements, and wonders obsolete. While obsolete units merely become impossible for you to make -- leaving the ones you have already made intact -- obsolete improvements are immediately sold, and obsolete wonders lose their effect. See the relevant sections for more information.

=== About Nations
Each player in the game is represented by a nation. A nation can be a modern-day nation state, a historical state or empire, an ethnic group, or even a fictional nation. Nations are distinguished by their flags, leaders and city names, but are identical in all other aspects and play by the same rules.

=== Copying
Freeciv is covered by the GPL.


